Introduction

In “Computational Physics”. Giordono describes and models a system of a single decaying nucleus to demonstrate an application of Euler’s method.  Using this problem as a motivation, we expand our analysis to a system of two decaying particles.  In our system we choose to have the first particle, nucleus A, decay into our second particle, nucleus B.  Each particle has a unique decay time:  and  .

Our system is modeled by the following differential equations:




While it is possible to find analytic solutions to these differential equations, we endeavor to, like Giordono, find a numerical approximation to develop general computational methods that can be applied to other problems.  

We are bounded by the condition that neither  or  can be explicitly measured in the lab but only the ratio of  can be measured to within  accuracy.

In the following paper we will describe our method for finding a model of the decay of nuclei A and B.  We will show how we found the dependence of our model on the ratio of the decay times of nucleus A to nucleus B, and the error in time resultant from the error in accuracy of measurement of the ratio.  

Methods 

Since only the population ratio can be measured, as opposed to the populations of the individual nuclei types, we frame our implementation in terms of the population ratio as a whole.  Then, in order to begin the linearization in our use of Euler’s method, we first define  .  Our ultimate goal is to devise some sort of recursive formula, but first we linearize  to get: .   This is heartening because we know the ratio that  represents and so the derivative is easily found.  




And then, since 



And 



We can substitute these equations into our equation for  to yield




From here we simply plug back into :



The above equation is the recursive formula we use in our computational implementation.  Then, since , and , we find that 




Results
 

Figure 1 illustrates the analytic solution and the exact solution (the numerical solution) for , or .  Figure 2 illustrates the solutions for .  Figure 3 illustrates the solutions for .  We see that for , the slope of the curve is positive but decreasing.  When , we see that the exact and analytic solutions are linear.  When , we see that the slope of the curve is  positive and increasing.  The ratio of the 
population of nucleus B to nucleus A increases regardless of the ratio of decay time for A to decay time for B.  However, the value for  does impact the rate of increase of the population ratio.  As  decreases, the rate of increase increases.  



 



 Conclusions

We find that our numerical model matches the analytic solution satisfactorily.  We also find that the dependence of our results on  also is satisfactory.  The population of nucleus B compared to the population of nucleus A should depend on how long it takes nucleus B to decay compared to how long it takes nucleus A to decay.  If nucleus B takes longer to decay than nucleus A, we would expect the ratio of B to A to increase at an increasing rate.  Likewise, if nucleus A takes longer to decay than nucleus B, then we would expect the ratio of B to A to increase at a decreasing rate.  